Added Signal Hub specs (#812)
italia/eid-wallet-it-docs: docs/en/signal-hub-endpoint.rst

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. "included" file, so we start with '-' title level

.. role:: raw-html(raw)
  :format: html

PDND Signal Hub Endpoints
-------------------------

> Within the PDND platform, the Signal Hub acts as an intermediary between a PDND Provider and its PDND Consumers to signal data variations. To achieve that, the manager of the PDND platform, hereafter the PDND Manager, provides (playing the role of PDND e-Service Provider) two PDND Signal Hub e-Services:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the PDND platform, the Signal Hub serves as an intermediary component between PDND Providers and their PDND Consumers to facilitate real-time data variation notifications. To enable this functionality, the PDND Manager, acting in the role of PDND e-Service Provider, offers the following specialized PDND Signal Hub e-Services:
```

>   - the Signal Collection e-Service which is used by PDND e-Service Providers to deposit Signals (here, the PDND e-Service Provider acts as Consumer of the Signal Collection e-Service);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - the Signal Collection e-Service which is used by PDND e-Service Providers to deposit Signals, since the PDND e-Service Provider acts as Consumer of the Signal Collection e-Service;
```

>   - the Signal Distribution e-Service which is used by PDND e-Service Consumers to retrieve collected Signals (here, the PDND e-Service Consumer also acts as Consumer of the Signal Distribution e-Service).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - the Signal Distribution e-Service which is used by PDND e-Service Consumers to retrieve collected Signals, since the PDND e-Service Consumer also acts as Consumer of the Signal Distribution e-Service.
```

> In order to protect the privacy of the Signal's subject, the PDND Manager requires each PDND e-Service Provider to pseudonymize the subject's identifier used within the Signals and set up a pseudonymization endpoint for their PDND e-Service. This pseudonymization endpoint is used by e-Service Consumers to obtain the pseudonymization algorithm in order to calculate the Signal subject's pseudonym. Only the PDND e-Service Provider and its PDND e-Service Consumers are able to link a Signal to the subject's personal data, while the PDND Manager only handles pseudonymized identifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to protect the privacy of the Signal's subject, the PDND Manager requires each PDND e-Service Provider to pseudonymize the subject's identifier used within the Signals and set up a pseudonymization endpoint for their PDND e-Service. This pseudonymization endpoint is used by e-Service Consumers to use the pseudonymization algorithm in order to calculate the Signal subject's pseudonym. Only the PDND e-Service Provider and its PDND e-Service Consumers are able to link a Signal to the subject's personal data, while the PDND Manager only handles pseudonymized identifiers.
```

> In order to protect the privacy of the Signal's subject, the PDND Manager requires each PDND e-Service Provider to pseudonymize the subject's identifier inside Signals and set up a pseudonymization endpoint for their PDND e-Service. This pseudonymization endpoint is used by e-Service Consumers to obtain the pseudonymization algorithm used to calculate the Signal subject's pseudonym. In this way, only the PDND e-Service Provider and its PDND e-Service Consumers are able to link a Signal to the subject's personal data, while the PDND Manager only handles pseudonymized identifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to protect the privacy of the Signal's subject, the PDND Manager requires each PDND e-Service Provider to pseudonymize the subject's identifier used within the Signals and set up a pseudonymization endpoint for their PDND e-Service. This pseudonymization endpoint is used by e-Service Consumers to obtain the pseudonymization algorithm in order to calculate the Signal subject's pseudonym. Only the PDND e-Service Provider and its PDND e-Service Consumers are able to link a Signal to the subject's personal data, while the PDND Manager only handles pseudonymized identifiers.
```

For detailed technical specifications and implementation guidelines, please refer to the `Signal Hub Guide`_.

In the context of the IT Wallet, Authentic Sources interact with the Signal Hub to notify Credential Issuers about changes in the status and/or value of attributes associated with Digital Credentials. Specifically, 
  - the Authentic Source will deposit Signals in the Signal Hub, thus playing the role of PDND Consumer of the Signal Collection e-Service; 
  - the Credential Issuer will retrieve Signals from the Signal Hub, and will thus play the role of PDND e-Service Consumer of the Signal Distribution e-Service. 

.. note::
  In the context of IT Wallet, due to the particular nature of the data exchanged, the pseudonymization of the Signal's subject is not needed since it is already an opaque identifier unrelated to the Digial Credential's subject. Thus, the Authentic Source does not need to set up a pseudonymization endpoint for its e-Services. 

> Authentic Sources that leverage PDND must use the Signal Hub e-Services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authentic Sources that leverage PDND SHOULD use the Signal Hub e-Services.
```

there could be short lived datasets and credentials too ...

Reviewer: this should be ported in the italian trnaslation as well

@andmoro @andreamisuraca ^

> Authentic Sources that leverage PDND SHOULD use the Signal Hub e-Services.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Authentic Sources that leverage PDND MUST use the Signal Hub e-Services.
```

> The use of the Signal Hub e-Services is mandatory for all public Authentic Sources that are part of the IT Wallet ecosystem. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Authentic Sources that leverage PDND must use the Signal Hub e-Services.
```

> The use of the Signal Hub e-Services is mandatory for all public Authentic Sources that are part of the IT Wallet ecosystem. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: We shall remove the normative part from credential revocation and leave this as it is currently

Signal Hub e-Services
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This section describes the endpoints available for the Signal Hub Collection and Distribution e-Services, including their functionalities and the expected request and response formats.

Signal Collection e-Service
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Authentic Sources in the IT Wallet ecosystem use the Signal Collection e-Service to:

  - notify the Credential Issuer of a change of status and/or value of a specific attribute associated with a Digital Credential issued by the Credential Issuer;
  - notify the Credential Issuer of the availability of the attributes related to a specific Digital Credential which a User requested in its Wallet. 
  
The last case, referred to as deferred issuance, happens when the Credential Issuer has requested a Digital Credential's attributes from the Authentic Source (invoking the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint) and the Authentic Source cannot respond immediately with the requested attributes. Thus, the Authentic Source notifies the Credential Issuer via the Signal Hub at a later time that the requested attributes are now available.

> The Signal Collection e-Service endpoint is used by Authentic Sources to deposit Signals to the Signal Hub via a Signal Collection request. The latter MUST be a POST request with ``Content-Type`` set to ``application-json``, whose header MUST have the parameters described in `Signal Hub Guide`_ and whose body MUST contain the following parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Signal Collection e-Service endpoint is used by Authentic Sources to deposit Signals to the Signal Hub via a Signal Collection request. The latter MUST be a POST request with ``Content-Type`` set to ``application/json``, whose header MUST have the parameters described in `Signal Hub Guide`_ and whose body MUST contain the following parameters:
```

.. _table_Signal_deposit_request_parameters:
.. list-table::
  :widths: 25 75
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Parameter Name**
    - **Description**
  * - **signalId**
    - REQUIRED. A positive 64 bit integer number referencing the identifier of the Signal in chronological order.
  * - **objectType**

>     - REQUIRED. This filed is a free field which the Authentic Source MAY use to further specify the Signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - REQUIRED. Using this field the Authentic Source MAY use to further specify the Signal.
```

  * - **objectId**

>     - REQUIRED. The subject to which the Signal is bound. If the Signal 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - REQUIRED. The subject to which the Signal is bound. If the Signal has ``signalType``:
```

>     - REQUIRED. The subject to which the Signal is bound. If the Signal 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - REQUIRED. The subject to which the Signal is bound. If the Signal meets the following conditions, it:
```

Reviewer 2: rephrased in the comments below

>       - has ``signalType`` ``CREATE``, then it MUST be set to the ``jti`` value the Credental Issuer used in the Agid-JWT-Signature token of the `get attributes` request to the Authentic Source to obtain the attributes related to a specific Digital Credential (see :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims`);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - ``CREATE``, then it MUST be set to the ``jti`` value the Credental Issuer used in the Agid-JWT-Signature token of the `get attributes` request to the Authentic Source to obtain the attributes related to a specific Digital Credential (see :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims`);
```

>       - has ``signalType`` ``UPDATE``, then it MUST be set to the Authentic Source's unique database identifier of the Digital Credential's attributes the Signal refers to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - ``UPDATE``, then it MUST be set to the Authentic Source's unique database identifier of the Digital Credential's attributes the Signal refers to.
```

      
  * - **signalType**
    - REQUIRED. Signal Type. It MUST be one of the following: 

      - ``UPDATE``, when the Signal refers to a change in the status and/or value of a specific attribute associated with a Digital Credential;
      - ``CREATE``, when the Signal refers to the availability of the attributes of a specific Digital Credential;

  * - **eserviceId**
    - REQUIRED. e-Service to which the Signal is bound. It MUST correspond to the e-Service Id value the Authentic Source is a Provider of.

.. note::

>   In the deffered issuance flow, i.e., when the Authentic Source notifies the Credential Issuer of the availability of the Digital Credential's attributes via Signal Hub; both entities MUST keep track of the Credential Issuer's ``jti`` value used in the Agid-JWT-Signature of the ``get attributes`` request. This is necessary since the ``objectId`` of the Signal MUST be set to that ``jti`` value when the Signal has ``signalType`` ``CREATE``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In the deffered issuance flow, i.e., when the Authentic Source notifies the Credential Issuer of the availability of the Digital Credential's attributes via Signal Hub; both entities MUST keep track of the Credential Issuer's ``jti`` value used in the Agid-JWT-Signature of the ``get attributes`` request. This is necessary since the ``objectId`` of the Signal MUST be set to that ``jti`` value when the Signal has ``signalType`` set with ``CREATE``.
```

>   In the deffered issuance flow, i.e., when the Authentic Source notifies the Credential Issuer of the availability of the Digital Credential's attributes via Signal Hub; both entities MUST keep track of the Credential Issuer's ``jti`` value used in the Agid-JWT-Signature of the ``get attributes`` request. This is necessary since the ``objectId`` of the Signal MUST be set to that ``jti`` value when the Signal has ``signalType`` ``CREATE``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  In the deffered issuance flow, i.e., when the Authentic Source notifies the Credential Issuer of the availability of the Digital Credential's attributes via Signal Hub; both entities MUST keep track of the Credential Issuer's ``jti`` value used in the Agid-JWT-Signature of the ``get attributes`` request. This is necessary since the ``objectId`` of the Signal MUST be set to that ``jti`` value when the Signal has ``signalType`` with value ``CREATE``.
```

> Non normative example of Signal Collection request for an can be found at `Signal Hub push`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A non normative example of the Signal Collection request can be found at `Signal Hub push`_.
```

The Signal Collection e-Service response, acknowledging the correct parsing of the request, is specified in `Signal Hub push`_, and has ``Content-Type`` set to ``application/json``. The payload contains the body parameter:

.. _table_Signal_deposit_response_parameters:
.. list-table::
  :widths: 25 75
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Parameter Name**
    - **Description**
  * - **signalId**
    - REQUIRED. The identifier of the Signal that has been successfully collected by the Signal Collection e-Service.

> If any error occurs during the request parsing, the response MUST adhere to the error format defined in `Signal Hub push-yaml`_`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If any error occurs during the request parsing, the response MUST adhere to the error format defined in `Signal Hub push-yaml`_.
```

.. note::
    A complete OpenAPI Specification of the Signal Collection e-Service is available `Signal Hub push-yaml`_.

The Authentic Source MUST implement the necessary logic to handle the requests to the Signal Collection e-Service endpoint, in doing this it has to consider the following aspects:

>   - Signals are sent per PDND e-Service, meaning that the Authentic Source SHOULD implement a Signal deposit cycle for each e-Service ID it is a PDND Provider of;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Signals are sent per PDND e-Service, therefore the Authentic Source SHOULD implement a Signal deposit cycle for each e-Service ID it is a PDND Provider of;
```

>   - Signals are labeled by a unique identifier, the ``signalId``, which is a positive 64 bit integer number. The ``signalId`` MUST be incremented by 1 for each new Signal the Authentic Source wishes to deposit in the Signal Collection e-Service endpoint. It is up to the Authentic Source to keep track of the last ``signalId`` it has sent. Signals with lower ``signalId`` values are considered older by the Signal Collection e-Service endpoint and will raise an error when received.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Signals are labeled by a unique identifier, the ``signalId``, which is a positive 64 bit integer number. The ``signalId`` MUST be incremented by 1 for each new Signal the Authentic Source wishes to deposit in the Signal Collection e-Service endpoint. It is up to the Authentic Source to keep track of the last ``signalId`` it has sent. Signals with lower ``signalId`` values are considered older by the Signal Collection e-Service endpoint and raise an error when received.
```

Reviewer 2: this is a PDND service action, we should not norm it here, we can leave it as it is or refer to the PDND yaml.

Reviewer: yesterday I had this conversation with andrea

anyway I agree with you and I have just removed the normative language replacing it with a neutral one

Signal Distribution e-Service
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
Credential Issuers in the IT Wallet ecosystem use the Signal Distribution e-Service to:

  - check for changes in the status and/or value of a specific attribute associated with a Digital Credential issued by the Credential Issuer itself;
  - check for the availability of attributes related to a Digital Credential requested by a User.

> The Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint is used by Credential Issuers to retrieve Signals from the Signal Hub via a Signal Distribution request. The latter MUST be a GET request and MUST have the following parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint is used by Credential Issuers to retrieve Signals from the Signal Hub via a Signal Distribution request. The latter MUST use an HTTP request using the method GET and the following parameters:
```

Regardless of the response code used, the response has ``Content-Type`` set to ``application/json`` an the header parameters indicated in `Signal Hub pull`_. The body parameter ``lastSignalId``, referencing the ``signalId`` of the last Signal transmitted by the Signal Distribution e-Service is added to the response's payload.

In `Signal Hub pull`_ can be found non normative examples of a Signal Distribution requests and responses.

If any error occurs during the request parsing, the response MUST adhere to the error format defined in `Signal Hub pull-yaml`_.

.. note::
  A complete OpenAPI Specification of the Signal Collection e-Service is available `Signal Hub pull-yaml`_.

The Credential Issuer MUST implement the necessary logic to handle the Polling of the Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint, in doing this it has to consider the following aspects:

  - Signals are queried and retrieved per PDND e-Service, meaning that the Credential Issuer MUST implement a poll cycle for each e-Service ID;
  - the retention period of Signals in the Signal Hub is specified in `Signal Hub Guide`_. Signals older than the specified retention period are not available for retrieval;

>   - the Signal Hub does not keep trak of the last ``signalId`` notified to a specific Credential Issuer. Thus each Credential Issuer MUST keep track of the last ``signalId`` it has received for each PDND e-Service ID;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - the Signal Hub does not keep track of the last ``signalId`` notified to a specific Credential Issuer. Each Credential Issuer MUST keep track of the last ``signalId`` it has received for each PDND e-Service ID;
```

  - the Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint returns Signals in batches. The maximal size the batch is specified in `Signal Hub Guide`_. The Signal Distribution e-Service will indicate if additional Signals are available for retrieval.

Signals Processing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
After the Signals have been successfully recovered by the Credential Issuer, the latter MUST process them as follows:

  - For each Signal, the Credential Issuer MUST check the ``SignalType`` value:
    

>     - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``UPDATE``, it means that the status and/or value of the attribute associated with a Digest Credential need updates; instead,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``UPDATE``, the status and/or value of the attribute associated with a Digest Credential need updates;
```

>     - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``CREATE``, it means that the requested attributes of a specific Digital Credential are now available; 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``CREATE``, the requested attributes of a specific Digital Credential are now available; 
```

>     If the ``objectId`` does not correspond to any valid identifier known to the Credential Issuer, the Signal MUST be ignored. Otherwise, if it corresponds to a known and valid identifier, the Credential Issuer MUST use the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint of the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information and in case apply the new status to the correspondent Credential.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the ``objectId`` does not correspond to any valid identifier known to the Credential Issuer, the Signal MUST be ignored. Otherwise, if it corresponds to a known and valid identifier, the Credential Issuer MUST use the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint of the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information and, if applicable, apply the new status to the corresponding Credential.
```

>     If the ``objectId`` does not correspond to any valid identifier known to the Credential Issuer, the Signal MUST be ignored. If instead it corresponds to a known and valid identifier, the Credential Issuer MUST use the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint of the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information and in case apply the new status to the correspondent Credential.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If the ``objectId`` does not correspond to any valid identifier known to the Credential Issuer, the Signal MUST be ignored. Otherwise, if it corresponds to a known and valid identifier, the Credential Issuer MUST use the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint of the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information and in case apply the new status to the correspondent Credential.
```

    
    When the Signal has been processed, the Credential Issuer will either move to the next Signal and update its ``signalId`` counter; or, if there are no more Signals to process, it will resume the Pull cycle.

.. warning::

>   Given Signal Hub's currently supported security patterns, if the Authentic Source requires the `AUDIT_REST_02` security pattern from the Credential Issuer, the latter MUST revoke the Digital Credential referenced in Signals with ``signalType`` ``UPDATE`` since it cannot contact the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information without the User's consent.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Given Signal Hub's currently supported security patterns, if the Authentic Source requires the `AUDIT_REST_02` security pattern from the Credential Issuer, the latter MUST revoke the Digital Credential referenced in Signals with ``signalType`` ``UPDATE`` since it cannot contact the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information without having authenticated the User before.  
```

For detailed technical specifications and implementation guidelines, please refer to the :raw-html:`<a href="https://developer.pagopa.it/pdnd-interoperabilita/guides/manuale-operativo-Signal-hub" target="_blank">Signal Hub User Guide</a>`.

In the context of the IT Wallet, Authentic Sources interact with the Signal Hub to notify Credential Issuers about changes in the status and/or value of attributes associated with Digital Credentials. Specifically, 
  - the Authentic Source will deposit Signals in the Signal Hub, thus playing the role of PDND Consumer of the Signal Collection e-Service; 
  - the Credential Issuer will retrieve Signals from the Signal Hub, and will thus play the role of PDND e-Service Consumer of the Signal Distribution e-Service. 

.. note::

  In the context of IT Wallet, due to the particular nature of the data exchanged, the pseudonymization of the Signal's subject is not needed since it is already an opaque identifier unrelated to the Digial Credential's subject. Thus, the Authentic Source does not need to set up a pseudonymization endpoint for its e-Services. 

> The use of the Signal Hub e-Services is mandatory for all Authentic Sources and Credential Issuers that are part of the IT Wallet ecosystem. 

Reviewer 3: Signal Hub is mandatory only for public Authentic Sources

> The use of the Signal Hub e-Services is mandatory for all Authentic Sources and Credential Issuers that are part of the IT Wallet ecosystem. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The use of the Signal Hub e-Services is mandatory for all public Authentic Sources that are part of the IT Wallet ecosystem. 
```

The Signal Collection e-Service endpoint is used by Authentic Sources to deposit Signals to the Signal Hub via a Signal Collection request. The latter MUST be a POST request with ``Content-Type`` set to ``application-json``, whose header MUST have the parameters described in :raw-html:`<a href="https://developer.pagopa.it/pdnd-interoperabilita/guides/manuale-operativo-signal-hub/1.0/tutorial/come-depositare-un-segnale" target="_blank">Signal Hub Signal Collection</a>` and whose body MUST contain the following parameters:

.. _table_Signal_deposit_request_parameters:
.. list-table::
  :widths: 25 75
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Parameter Name**
    - **Description**
  * - **signalId**
    - REQUIRED. A positive 64 bit integer number referencing the identifier of the Signal in chronological order.
  * - **objectType**

>     - REQUIRED. This filed is a free filed which the Authentic Source MAY use to further specify the Signal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - REQUIRED. This filed is a free filled which the Authentic Source MAY use to further specify the Signal.
```

>     - REQUIRED. This filed is a free filed which the Authentic Source MAY use to further specify the Signal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - REQUIRED. This filed is a free field which the Authentic Source MAY use to further specify the Signal.
```

  * - **objectId**
    - REQUIRED. The subject to which the Signal is bound. If the Signal 
    

>       - has ``signalType`` ``CREATE``, then it MUST be set to the ``jti`` value the Credental Issuer used in the Agid-JWT-Signature token of the `get_attributes` request to the Authentic Source to obtain the attributes related to a specific Digital Credential (see :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims`);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      - has ``signalType`` ``CREATE``, then it MUST be set to the ``jti`` value the Credental Issuer used in the Agid-JWT-Signature token of the `get attributes` request to the Authentic Source to obtain the attributes related to a specific Digital Credential (see :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims`);
```

>       - has ``signalType`` ``UPDATE``, then it MUST be set to the Authentic Source's unique database identifier of the Digial Credential's attributes the Signal refers to.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      - has ``signalType`` ``UPDATE``, then it MUST be set to the Authentic Source's unique database identifier of the Digital Credential's attributes the Signal refers to.
```

      
  * - **signalType**
    - REQUIRED. Signal Type. It MUST be one of the following: 

      - ``UPDATE``, when the Signal refers to a change in the status and/or value of a specific attribute associated with a Digital Credential;
      - ``CREATE``, when the Signal refers to the availability of the attributes of a specific Digital Credential;

  * - **eserviceId**
    - REQUIRED. e-Service to which the Signal is bound. It MUST correspond to the e-Service Id value the Authentic Source is a Provider of.

.. note::

>   In the deffered issuance flow, i.e., when the Authentic Source notifies the Credential Issuer of the availability of the Digital Credential's attributes via Signal Hub; both entities MUST keep track of the Credential Issuer's ``jti`` value used in the Agid-JWT-Signature of the ``get_attributes`` request. This is necessary since the ``objectId`` of the Signal MUST be set to that ``jti`` value when the Signal has ``signalType`` ``CREATE``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  In the deffered issuance flow, i.e., when the Authentic Source notifies the Credential Issuer of the availability of the Digital Credential's attributes via Signal Hub; both entities MUST keep track of the Credential Issuer's ``jti`` value used in the Agid-JWT-Signature of the ``get attributes`` request. This is necessary since the ``objectId`` of the Signal MUST be set to that ``jti`` value when the Signal has ``signalType`` ``CREATE``.
```

  - the Signal Hub does not keep trak of the last ``signalId`` notified to a specific Credential Issuer. Thus each Credential Issuer MUST keep track of the last ``signalId`` it has received for each PDND e-Service ID;
  - the Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint returns Signals in batches. The maximal size the batch is specified in :raw-html:`<a href="https://developer.pagopa.it/pdnd-interoperabilita/guides/manuale-operativo-Signal-hub" target="_blank">Signal Hub User Guide</a>`. The Signal Distribution e-Service will indicate if additional Signals are available for retrieval.

Signals Processing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
After the Signals have been successfully recovered by the Credential Issuer, the latter MUST process them as follows:

  - For each Signal, the Credential Issuer MUST check the ``SignalType`` value:
    
    - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``UPDATE``, it means that the status and/or value of the attribute associated with a Digest Credential need updates; instead,
    - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``CREATE``, it means that the requested attributes of a specific Digital Credential are now available; 

>     If the ``objectId`` does not correspond to any identifier know to the Credential Issuer, the Signal MUST be ignored. If instead it corresponds to a known identifier, the Credential Issuer MUST use the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint of the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    If the ``objectId`` does not correspond to any valid identifier known to the Credential Issuer, the Signal MUST be ignored. If instead it corresponds to a known and valid identifier, the Credential Issuer MUST use the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint of the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information and in case apply the new status to the correspondent Credential.
```

    
    When the Signal has been processed, the Credential Issuer will either move to the next Signal and update its ``signalId`` counter; or, if there are no more Signals to process, it will resume the Pull cycle.

.. warning::

>   Given Signal Hub's currently supported security patterns, if the Authentic Source requires the `AUDIT_REST_02` security pattern from the Credential Issuer, the latter MUST revoke the Digital Credential referenced in Signals with ``signalType`` ``UPDATE`` before contacting the Authentic Source using the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint. This process allows the Credential Issuer to provide evidence to the Authentic Source, via the `Agid-JWT-TrackingEvidence`, that the request includes the User's consent. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Given Signal Hub's currently supported security patterns, if the Authentic Source requires the `AUDIT_REST_02` security pattern from the Credential Issuer, the latter MUST revoke the Digital Credential referenced in Signals with ``signalType`` ``UPDATE`` since it cannot contact the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information without the User's consent.  
```

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. "included" file, so we start with '-' title level

.. role:: raw-html(raw)
  :format: html

PDND Signal Hub Endpoints
-------------------------

> Within the PDND platform, the Signal Hub acts as an intermediary between a PDND Provider and its PDND Consumers to centralize and facilitate the exchange of messages containing data variations called Signals. To achieve that the manager of the PDND platform, hereafter the PDND Manager, provides (playing the role of PDND e-Service Provider) two PDND Signal Hub e-Services:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the PDND platform, the Signal Hub acts as an intermediary between a PDND Provider and its PDND Consumers to signal data variations. To achieve that, the manager of the PDND platform, hereafter the PDND Manager, provides (playing the role of PDND e-Service Provider) two PDND Signal Hub e-Services:
```

  - have obtained the necessary pseudonymization algorithm from the Authentic Sources' pseudonymization endpoints as described in :raw-html:`<a href="https://developer.pagopa.it/pdnd-interoperabilita/guides/manuale-operativo-Signal-hub/tutorial/come-ottenere-le-informazioni-crittografiche" target="_blank">Signal Hub - Pseudonymization</a>`.

Signal Hub e-Services
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This section describes the endpoints available for the Signal Hub Collection and Distribution e-Services, including their functionalities and the expected request and response formats.

Signal Collection e-Service
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Authentic Sources in the IT Wallet ecosystem use the Signal Collection e-Service to:

  - notify the Credential Issuer of a change of status and/or value of a specific attribute associated with a Digital Credential issued by the Credential Issuer;
  - notify the Credential Issuer of a variation in the pseudonymization algorithm;
  - notify the Credential Issuer of the availability of the attributes related to a specific Digital Credential which a User requested in its Wallet. 
  

> The last case happens whenever the Credential Issuer has requested a Digital Credential's attributes from the Authentic Source (invoking the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint), but the Authentic Source cannot respond immediately with the requested attributes. Thus, the Authentic Source notifies the Credential Issuer via the Signal Hub at a later time that the requested attributes are now available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last case happens when the Credential Issuer has requested a Digital Credential's attributes from the Authentic Source (invoking the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint) and the Authentic Source cannot respond immediately with the requested attributes. Thus, the Authentic Source notifies the Credential Issuer via the Signal Hub at a later time that the requested attributes are now available.
```

The Signal Collection e-Service endpoint is used by Authentic Sources to deposit Signals to the Signal Hub via a Signal Collection request. The latter MUST be a POST request with ``Content-Type`` set to ``application-json``, whose header MUST have the parameters described in :ref:`e-Service-pdnd:e-Service Usage` and whose body MUST contain the following parameters:

.. _table_Signal_deposit_request_parameters:
.. list-table::
  :widths: 25 75
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Parameter Name**
    - **Description**
  * - **signalId**
    - REQUIRED. A positive 64 bit integer number referencing the identifier of the Signal in chronological order.
  * - **objectType**

>     - REQUIRED. REQUIRED. Digital Credential Type. The value of this parameter is the same as the ``credential_type`` value present in the Catalogue. If the Signal refers to a cryptographic variation, then it MUST be set to ``-``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - REQUIRED. Digital Credential Type. The value of this parameter is the same as the ``credential_type`` value present in the Catalogue. If the Signal refers to a cryptographic variation, then it MUST be set to ``-``.
```

  * - **objectId**

>     - REQUIRED. The pseudonym to which the Signal is bound. If the Signal refers to a cryptographic variation, then it MUST be set to ``-``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - REQUIRED. The subject to which the Signal is bound. If the Signal 
    
      - refers to a cryptographic variation, then it MUST be set to ``-``. 
      - has ``signalType`` ``CREATE``, then it MUST be set to the pseudonym of the Signal's subject, i.e., the User;
      - has ``signalType`` ``ATTRIBUTE_UPDATE``, ``REVOKE`` or ``SUSPEND``, then it MUST be set to the Authentic Source's unique database identifier of the Digial Credential's attributes the Signal refers to.
      
```

>   * - **SignalType**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * - **signalType**
```

    - REQUIRED. Signal Type. It MUST be one of the following: 
    

>       - ``ATTRIBUTE_UPDATE``, when the Signal refers to a change of status and/or value for a specific attribute associated with a Digital Credential;

Reviewer: @andreamisuraca this is the brand new signal type proposed in the it-wallet specs and required by implementers, in particular by credential issuers.

we need a joint approval for this.

Author: @peppelinux can we encode this information in the `objectType` field? Signal Hub is a general-purpose feature, whereas CREATE, REVOKE, and SUSPEND seem to be specifically related to IT Wallet.

Reviewer 2: The rationale behind the addition of these parameters is the following: when the CI obtains a Signal, it needs to understand which subsequent actions are required.

More specifically, 
- If the signal type is ``CREATE`` (or ``ATTRIBUTE_UPDATE``), it means that attributes (or new attributes) are available at the AS endpoint `get_attributes`. The CI then uses the PDND to request access to the e-service
- If the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``SUSPEND`` (or ``REVOKE``), it means that the attributes contained in the Digital Credential have been temporarily suspended due to, e.g., driving licence suspension (or revoked, due to e.g., user death). The CI, will then proceed to suspend or revoke the DC in question.

The ``object_type`` parameter is mutated from the SH specifications and instantiated with the digital credential type. This is also necessary, since if a CI issues more than one DC, then it needs to know which credential the Signal refers to.

The current attributes (``UPDATE``, ``SEEDUPDATE``, ``DELETE``) are not sufficient for the above requirements. Of course, other mechanisms are possible. Let me know what you think.

Author: @andmoro the `UPDATE` signal indicates that something has changed, including the credential status, which is also considered an `UPDATE`. When the CI retrieves information from the AS, it will interpret whether the change was due to credential suspension or revocation. This way, even the PDND remains unaware of the specific changes occurring within the IT Wallet domain. I believe the current status of the credential (`CREATE`, `SUSPEND`, `REVOKE`) should be included within the AS e-service. Do you agree?

Reviewer 3: @andreamisuraca the AS e-service is designed to require, optionally within the request, a proof
of the User authentication, in this way, the Credential Issuer cannot access User Attributes without the User's consent.
We should update Credential Status without calling AS e-Service.

Author: @m-basili @andmoro can we extend the AS e-service by adding an additional endpoint? For example, using the `unique_credential_identifier`, it could return the most recent status and the timestamp of the change.

Reviewer 3: It means that the AS should implement 2 e-Services: "getAttributeClaims" and "getAttributeStatus". The status that the AS provides must be one of the defined in the IT-Wallet specification (valid, invalid, suspended).

Author: Can you just have a single e-service with two paths?

      - ``CREATE``, when the Signal refers to the availability of the attributes of a specific Digital Credential;
      - ``REVOKE``, when the Signal refers to the revocation of the attributes contained in the Digital Credential;
      - ``SUSPEND``, when the Signal refers to the temporary suspension of the attributes contained in the Digital Credential;

>       - ``SALTUPDATE``, when the Signal refers to a change in the pseudonymization algorithm' salt value used by the Authentic Source.

Reviewer 3: As reported in the Signal Hub analysis we suggest to use the term SALT instead of SEED.

Reviewer: @andreamisuraca  is there something againts that?

>   * - **dataId**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>   * - **dataId**

Reviewer: @andreamisuraca this parameter was also added as an extension for it-wallet purposes. 

this parameter dones and must not contain any subject's personal information, but only an unique identifier, and pseudonymized too, about the data set.

Reviewer: @andmoro please add a more eloquent rationale about the value of this parameter, providing also a given example with a rela world use case.

Author: @peppelinux here I guess we need more info. I expected different e-services for different datasets from the same AS.

Reviewer 2: @andreamisuraca, here is the information & context I can provide.

The “dataId” claim serves the multicredential use case and is an add-on to the SH specifications. It is an opaque, unique ID that links a set of user attributes to the AS DB entry. We have not written this yet, but if needed, it can be pseudonymized, similar to the CF.

The typical use case is tied to an Education DC. For instance, if the AS holds both a bachelor’s and master’s degree for Mario, the CI will issue two separate credentials—one for each degree. Since the AS holds all the data, this “dataId” is used by the CI to understand which of the two credentials has been updated.

Keeping the use case requirements in mind, many possibilities are available. For instance, as @andreamisuraca suggested, one can require the AS to use a different e-service for each dataset. This entails that there is always a one-to-one relationship between the AS e-service and the DC. However, **for some use cases**—such as e-prescriptions—**this framework might not be possible**.

p.s. @peppelinux the above example of Education DC is the one I'm planning to add.

Author: @andmoro as I understand it, the `objectId` field will contain the `credential_type`, while the dataId claim will hold the unique identifier of the credential. What if the `objectId` were used for the credential's unique ID instead? In that case, wouldn’t the CI still be able to retrieve the `credential_type` from it?

Reviewer 3: @andreamisuraca, the `objectType` contains the ``credential_type``, while `dataId` contains the Authentic source's unique identifier of the Credential dataset that can also be used to identify the respective Credential by the Issuer.

As reported in the SignalHub specifications, the `objectId` represents the pseudonymized identifier of the **subject** to whom the signal refers. Can we consider a Credential a **subject**?

Author: @m-basili @andmoro we need to clarify this point further. You suggest the following mapping:
- `signalType`
- `objectType` = `credential_type`
- `objectId` = `pseudonymized_person_identifier`
- `dataId` = `unique_credential_identifier`

is that correct?

Can the `credential_type` be derived from the `unique_credential_identifier`?
Similarly, can the person associated with the credential be identified from `unique_credential_identifier`?

We need to determine whether any of these parameters might be redundant.

Reviewer 3: The mapping reflects the state of the art of PR.
`credential_type` cannot be derived from the `unique_credential_identifier`.

Maybe the dataset released by the AS identified by this ID might be the subject of the signal; in this case, we can assign the value unique_credential_identifier to the objectId.

Proposal:
The objectId might be the Credential dataset identifier in case of variation of Status or Attributes, while in the case of deferred flow the dataset is not already available, and we might use an identifier of the getAttributeRequest. What do you think?

`dataId` in this case will be redundant and we avoid pseudonymizing the `objectId`

Author: So, as I understand it, the `unique_credential_identifier` allows you to retrieve the person’s details.
You can then use that value in the `objectId` field, while in a deferred flow you would rely on a different type of identifier.
The key condition is being able to differentiate between these two identifiers.

If that works for you, then I don’t think the `dataId` parameter is necessary.

>     - OPTIONAL. Authentic Source database identifier of the Digial Credential's attributes the Signal refers to. This parameter MUST be provided when the Signal refers to a set of multiple attributes in the Authentic Source system.   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion 
```

  * - **eserviceId**
    - REQUIRED. e-Service to which the Signal is bound. It MUST correspond to the e-Service Id value the Authentic Source is a Provider of.

Non normative examples of Signal Collection requests for an UPDATE and a SEEDUPDATE Signal by the Authentic Source are presented below.

.. code-block:: http
    :name: code_Signal_deposit_Request_1

    POST /1.0/push/Signals HTTP/1.1

>     Host: api.Signalhub.interop.pagopa.it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Host: api.signalhub.interop.pagopa.it
```

Reviewer: @andreamisuraca ^

Author: @peppelinux @andmoro the specification looks fine, the capital letter seems to just be a typo. However, your example doesn’t fully align with the actual specs. Here’s a real cURL example for reference:

```
curl
--location 'https://api.signalhub.interop.pagopa.it/1.0/push/signals' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--header 'Accept: application/json' \
--header 'Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1Ni...' \
--data '{
  "signalType": "UPDATE",
  "objectId": "testid1",
  "eserviceId": "9b6993ee-60e3-4901-9a32-e6987d690ec4",
  "signalId": 7,
  "objectType": "test"
}'
```

Reviewer: @andmoro ^

    Agid-JWT-Signature: eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLCJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6ImY3YjI1NDhjYTZjYjM4NzY2YTU5NTFiYiJ9.eyJhdWQiOiJodHRwczovL2lzc3Vlci5leGFtcGxlLml0Iiwic3ViIjoiMzE2NzAwOTItZWVjMC00Zjk1LTg4ZGEtZTFjN2NlNWU0NTA1IiwibmJmIjoxNzM2ODQ2Njg4LCJwdXJwb3NlSWQiOiI1NzBhNDE1ZS0wZTdmLTQxMGQtODVlZC1jNTVlYTU1Mzc5MzIiLCJpc3MiOiIzMTY3MDA5Mi1lZWMwLTRmOTUtODhkYS1lMWM3Y2U1ZTQ1MDUiLCJleHAiOjE3MzY4NDY5MjgsImlhdCI6MTczNjg0NjY4OCwiY2xpZW50X2lkIjoiMzE2NzAwOTItZWVjMC00Zjk1LTg4ZGEtZTFjN2NlNWU0NTA1IiwianRpIjoiOGI5NzFiNDMtZTk5MC00NGZhLTkwMTMtMWIzNTNiZmM1YTBkIiwic2lnbmVkX2hlYWRlcnMiOnsiZGlnZXN0IjoiU0hBLTI1Nj1hZTVjMDNmZTM4MThiNDRiM2U2MDA0MDZjZWYzNzQwNGEyN2JkNTZiMzk4MTk1MjE4Mzg5ZjJlZDRhZThlMTBmIiwiY29udGVudC10eXBlIjoiYXBwbGljYXRpb24vanNvbiJ9fQ.a6Vd2s128ANPR-AWIEbLwEBtylYtLuH1IYKL-xCQG31BMBzB6F28PmFmw5_gxPRvzAJzyLuImSZX2VVrUmabGA
    Digest: SHA-256=ae5c03fe3818b44b3e600406cef37404a27bd56b398195218389f2ed4ae8e10f
    Content-Type: application/json

    {
      "signalId": 1,
      "objectType": "domicilio"
      "objectId": "fec44ba9afc68492a387199c9faaaa5d954b19b39140637712a67cb90c726575"
      "eserviceId": "b1817321-0486-4c75-89e5-4ee297250418",

>       "SignalType": "UPDATE"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      "signalType": "UPDATE"
```

    }

.. code-block:: http
    :name: code_Signal_deposit_Request_2

    POST /1.0/push/Signals HTTP/1.1

>     Host: api.Signalhub.interop.pagopa.it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Host: api.signalhub.interop.pagopa.it
```

    Agid-JWT-Signature: eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLCJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6ImY3YjI1NDhjYTZjYjM4NzY2YTU5NTFiYiJ9.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.P0iv1Lq2Yhw10Qu3XGikK6H8eb4flqzCfu2WwYZ-x7VbdbdnU3aWP2PsYVXu0Y2tBijQZC_6lx6uxUsG5GOLLQ
    Digest: SHA-256=976018449d1bd2bc36517a89d38a80b2d8667a00dcc2d3de26a64696348f9d00
    Content-Type: application/json

    {
      "signalId": 2,
      "objectType": "-"
      "objectId": "-"
      "eserviceId": "b1817321-0486-4c75-89e5-4ee297250418",

>       "SignalType": "SALTUPDATE"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      "signalType": "SALTUPDATE"
```

    }

> The Signal Collection e-Service response, acknowledging the correct parsing of the request, MUST have ``Content-Type`` set to ``application/jwt`` with the header and body containing the parameters described in :ref:`e-Service-pdnd:e-Service Response` with the addition of the body parameter:

Author: @peppelinux @andmoro why do you expect `application/jwt` in the response? This is an answer from the PDND after successfully pushing a signal:

```
Date: Wed, 10 Sep 2025 13:23:52 GMT
Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
Content-Length: 15
Connection: keep-alive
X-Rate-Limit-Limit: 50
X-Rate-Limit-Interval: 1000
X-Rate-Limit-Remaining: 49
X-Rate-Limit-Reset: 1757510633247
ETag: W/"f-4d+lY9jGxqzzarQ8Eeqimp5JXlA"

{"signalId":10}
```

Reviewer 3: The response is `application/jwt` to ensure integrity and authenticity, futhermore in IT-Wallet each e-service must adopt the following PDND security patterns: REST_JWS_2021_POP, ID_AUTH_CHANNEL_01, INTEGRITY_REST_02, AUDIT_REST_02.

Author: @m-basili this is the response from PDND Interop. All PDND APIs, including SignalHub, behave the same way, and REST_JWS_2021_POP, INTEGRITY_REST_02, and AUDIT_REST_02 are not applied. Do you see any issue with that?

Reviewer 3: @andreamisuraca, these patterns are defined in the PDND guidelines to ensure communication security features. If signalHub does not support them, the Credential Issuer should invoke AS e-Services (that support them) to retrieve the correct information in a secure manner after receiving the signal.

.. _table_Signal_deposit_response_parameters:
.. list-table::
  :widths: 25 75
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Parameter Name**
    - **Description**
  * - **signalId**
    - REQUIRED. The identifier of the Signal that has been successfully collected by the Signal Collection e-Service.

> If any error occurs during the request parsing, the response MUST adhere to the error format defined in :ref:`e-Service-pdnd:e-Service Response`.

Reviewer 3: @andreamisuraca, in SignalHub push-signals.yaml (https://github.com/pagopa/interop-signalhub-core/blob/main/docs/openAPI/push-signals.yaml), error management is different than what is defined in IT-Wallet Specification (https://italia.github.io/eid-wallet-it-docs/versione-corrente/en/e-service-pdnd.html#e-service-response)

.. only:: html

  .. note::

>     A complete OpenAPI Specification of the Signal Collection e-Service is available :raw-html:`<a href="OAS3-SH-AS.html" target="_blank">here</a>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    A complete OpenAPI Specification of the Signal Collection e-Service is available :raw-html:`<a href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pagopa/interop-signalhub-core/refs/tags/1.0.1/docs/openAPI/push-signals.yaml" target="_blank">here</a>`.
```

Reviewer: @andmoro `\https://` -> `https://`

  - Signals are sent per PDND e-Service, meaning that the Authentic Source SHOULD implement a Signal deposit cycle for each e-Service ID it is a PDND Provider of;
  - Signals are labeled by a unique identifier, the ``signalId``, which is a positive 64 bit integer number. The ``signalId`` MUST be incremented by 1 for each new Signal the Authentic Source wishes to deposit in the Signal Collection e-Service endpoint. It is up to the Authentic Source to keep track of the last ``signalId`` it has sent. Signals with lower ``signalId`` values are considered older by the Signal Collection e-Service endpoint and will raise an error when received.

Signal Distribution e-Service
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
Credential Issuers in the IT Wallet ecosystem use the Signal Distribution e-Service to:

  - check for changes in the status and/or value of a specific attribute associated with a Digital Credential issued by the Credential Issuer itself;
  - check for the availability of attributes related to a Digital Credential requested by a User;
  - check for variations in the pseudonymization algorithm used by the Authentic Source.

> The Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint is used by Credential Issuers to retrieve Signals from the Signal Hub via a Signal Distribution request. The latter MUST be a GET request and MUST have 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint is used by Credential Issuers to retrieve Signals from the Signal Hub via a Signal Distribution request. The latter MUST be a GET request and MUST have the following parameters set:
```

  - Path Parameters: 
    
    -  ``eserviceId``. REQUIRED. e-Service to which the Signal is bound. It MUST correspond to the e-Service Id value the Credential Issuer is a Consumer of.

  - Query Parameters:

    - ``signalId``. OPTIONAL. Integer representing the last Signal number processed by the Credential Issuer. The Signal Distribution e-Service will respond with Signals having progressively greater ``signalId`` values. If not specified, the default value is the lowest ``signalId`` value available in the Signal Distribution e-Service. 
    - ``size``. OPTIONAL. Integer representing the maximum number of Signals to be returned in the Signal Distribution response. If not specified, the default value is ``10``.

  - Headers parameters: these are those described in :ref:`e-Service-pdnd:e-Service Usage`.

Below it is provided a non normative example of a Signal Distribution request by the Credential Issuer:

.. code-block:: http
    :name: code_Signal_retrieve_Request

    GET /1.0/pull/Signals/b1817321-0486-4c75-89e5-4ee297250418?signalId=100&size=10 HTTP/1.1

>     Host: api.Signalhub.interop.pagopa.it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Host: api.signalhub.interop.pagopa.it
```

    DPoP: eyJ0eXAiOiJkcG9wK2p3dCIsImFsZyI6IkVTMjU2IiwiandrIjp7Imt0eSI6IkVDIiwia2V5X29wcyI6WyJzaWduIl0sImtpZCI6ImRGVTNNRDI4REpfamZzZmloUHZpMm8tQ3RqTEVVejNwT0lWMEJkTk1mZjgiLCJjcnYiOiJQLTI1NiIsIngiOiJodXlYSVFOdjkwMm9Mc3BYNF96b25DOTRHNnlFbG42bHNkbS0xd003MzJvIiwieSI6Ikk5UERFYXdXSHFhRkRHeDFaa05rLTJQVjZXZHBjYUgzQWZPYkJTTGloZ3cifX0.eyJqdGkiOiItQndDM0VTYzZhY2MybFRjIiwiaHRtIjoiUE9TVCIsImF0aCI6ImNiZGJmNmZlZWY0ODA2MjI4ZGJmNDY0Yjc1MGE5NGMyOGQ4ZTUzMDFhNzE1ZmZjM2U2Y2QyZjk0YjZlOGUxNTQiLCJodHUiOiJodHRwczovL3NlcnZlci5leGFtcGxlLmNvbS90b2tlbiIsImlhdCI6MTc2MjI2MjYxNn0.uL017GdfXzJ-9jhs6AUpwtkWLgyBgDWOtlrFvMltLp0C0NFwwMpOGnv-FxxwfYdJj--cteyCjGnmJZhekEKIEA

If the Signal Distribution request is correctly processed, the e-Service will then respond with status code

>  - HTTP 200 OK if the request is correctly formed and there are no more Signals to request,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - HTTP 200 OK if the request is correctly formed and there are no more Signals to request;
```

 - HTTP 206 OK if the request is correctly formed but there are more Signals to request.

> Regardless of the response code used, the response MUST have ``Content-Type`` set to ``application/jwt`` with the header and body containing the parameters described in :ref:`e-Service-pdnd:e-Service Response` with the addition of the body parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless of the response code used, the response MUST have ``Content-Type`` set to ``application/jwt`` with the header and body containing the parameters described in :ref:`e-Service-pdnd:e-Service Response` with the addition of the body parameters ``Signal``, containing the ..., and ``lastSignalId``:
```

Reviewer: @m-basili @andreamisuraca could you please fill the ... spaces?

Reviewer 2: @peppelinux, i've  added in the comment below the requested sentence.

> Regardless of the response code used, the response MUST have ``Content-Type`` set to ``application/jwt`` with the header and body containing the parameters described in :ref:`e-Service-pdnd:e-Service Response` with the addition of the body parameters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regardless of the response code used, the response MUST have ``Content-Type`` set to ``application/jwt`` with the header and body containing the parameters described in :ref:`e-Service-pdnd:e-Service Response` with the addition of the body parameters ``Signal``, containing an array of Signals, and ``lastSignalId``, referencing the ``signalId`` of the last Signal transmitted by the Signal Distribution e-Service. Below, details of the additional response parameters are given.
```

Reviewer 3: In the SignalHub specification, the content-type is set to ``application/json``, but in the IT-Wallet Specification, we defined these requirements for the e-Services PDND https://italia.github.io/eid-wallet-it-docs/versione-corrente/en/e-service-pdnd.html#e-service-response.

.. _table_Signal_retrieve_response_parameters:
.. list-table::
  :widths: 25 75
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Parameter Name**
    - **Description**
  * - **Signals**
    - REQUIRED. JSON Array of JSON Objects containing the Signals transmitted by the Signal Distribution e-Service to the Credential Issuer. Each JSON Object MUST contain the following parameters:
    
      - **signalId**: REQUIRED. Integer corresponding to the identifier of the Signal in chronological order.
      - **objectType**: REQUIRED. Digital Credential Type. The value of this parameter is the same as the ``credential_type`` value present in the Catalogue. If the Signal refers to a cryptographic variation, then it MUST be set to ``-``.
      - **objectId**: REQUIRED. The pseudonym to which the Signal is bound.
      - **SignalType**: REQUIRED. Signal Type. It MUST be one of the following:
      

>         - ``ATTRIBUTE_UPDATE``, when the Signal refers to a change of status and/or value for a specific attribute associated with a Digital Credential;

Reviewer: here again ATTRIBUTE_UPDATE

>       - **objectId**: REQUIRED. The pseudonym to which the Signal is bound.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - **objectId**: REQUIRED. The subject to which the Signal is bound. If the Signal 
    
        - refers to a cryptographic variation, then it MUST be set to ``-``. 
        - has ``signalType`` ``CREATE``, then it MUST be set to the pseudonym of the Signal's subject, i.e., the User;
        - has ``signalType`` ``ATTRIBUTE_UPDATE``, ``REVOKE`` or ``SUSPEND``, then it MUST be set to the Authentic Source's unique database identifier of the Digial Credential's attributes the Signal refers to.
      
```

>       - **SignalType**: REQUIRED. Signal Type. It MUST be one of the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - **signalType**: REQUIRED. Signal Type. It MUST be one of the following:
```

        - ``CREATE``, when the Signal refers to the availability of the attributes of a specific Digital Credential;
        - ``REVOKE``, when the Signal refers to the revocation of the attributes contained in the Digital Credential;
        - ``SUSPEND``, when the Signal refers to the temporary suspension of the attributes contained in the Digital Credential;
        - ``SALTUPDATE``, when the Signal refers to a change in the pseudonymization algorithm' salt value used by the Authentic Source.
      - **eserviceId**: REQUIRED. e-Service to which the Signal is bound. It MUST correspond to the e-Service Id value the PDND is a Consumer of.

>       - **dataId**: OPTIONAL. Authentic Source database identifier of the Digial Credential's attributes the Signal refers to.  This parameter MUST be provided when the Signal refers to a set of multiple attributes in the Authentic Source system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

.. code-block:: http
    :name: code_Signal_Signal Distribution_Response

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Content-Type: application/jwt
    
    eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjI4MDJhNjktMTYwNC00MjYxLTkyNDYtMjE0NTNlMjA2NThlIiwidHlwIjoiSldUIn0.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.MpF2pqoVZJwVBEkfcX3xGn_B_zmYSuYjd1JXVIImDT-yMxC9o1QOCRUjoJ-xTdHBqJzhzMHo22-rpZAADbhgdQ

The decoded body of the JWT is as follows:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/SH-pull-response-example-payload.json
  :language: JSON

> If any error occurs during the request parsing, the response MUST adhere to the error format defined in :ref:`e-Service-pdnd:e-Service Response`.

Reviewer 3: @andreamisuraca, in SignalHub pull-signals.yaml  (https://github.com/pagopa/interop-signalhub-core/blob/main/docs/openAPI/pull-signals.yaml), error management is different than what is defined in IT-Wallet Specification (https://italia.github.io/eid-wallet-it-docs/versione-corrente/en/e-service-pdnd.html#e-service-response)

.. only:: html

  .. note::

>     A complete OpenAPI Specification of the Signal Distribution e-Service is available :raw-html:`<a href="OAS3-SH-CI.html" target="_blank">here</a>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    A complete OpenAPI Specification of the Signal Distribution e-Service is available :raw-html:`<a href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pagopa/interop-signalhub-core/refs/tags/1.0.1/docs/openAPI/pull-signals.yaml" target="_blank">Signal Hub - Pseudonymization</a>`.
```

The Credential Issuer MUST implement the necessary logic to handle the Polling of the Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint, in doing this it has to consider the following aspects:

  - Signals are queried and retrieved per PDND e-Service, meaning that the Credential Issuer MUST implement a poll cycle for each e-Service ID;

>   - the retention period of Signals in the Signal Hub is 30 days, meaning that Signals older than 30 days are not available for retrieval;

Reviewer: please do a ref to PDND section where the retention period is defined, we must not redefine it here

Reviewer 2: see comment below

>   - the retention period of Signals in the Signal Hub is 30 days, meaning that Signals older than 30 days are not available for retrieval;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - the retention period of Signals in the Signal Hub is specified in :raw-html:`<a href="https://developer.pagopa.it/pdnd-interoperabilita/guides/manuale-operativo-signal-hub/1.0/la-guida-tecnica/retention-period-e-api-polling" target="_blank">Signal Hub User Guide</a>`. Signals older than the specified retention period are not available for retrieval;
```

  - the Signal Hub does not keep trak of the last ``signalId`` notified to a specific Credential Issuer. Thus each Credential Issuer MUST keep track of the last ``signalId`` it has received for each PDND e-Service ID;

>   - the Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint returns Signals in batches of at most 100 Signals at a time, specifying if more Signals are available for retrieval;  

Reviewer: please, reevaluate all the re-definitions replacing them with ref to PDND specs

Reviewer 2: see comment below

>   - the Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint returns Signals in batches of at most 100 Signals at a time, specifying if more Signals are available for retrieval;  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - the Signal Distribution e-Service endpoint returns Signals in batches. The maximal size the batch is specified in :raw-html:`<a href="https://developer.pagopa.it/pdnd-interoperabilita/guides/manuale-operativo-Signal-hub" target="_blank">Signal Hub User Guide</a>`. The Signal Distribution e-Service will indicate if additional Signals are available for retrieval;
```

      
      - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``UPDATE``, it means that the status and/or value of the attribute associated with a Digest Credential need updates; instead,
      - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``REVOKE``, it means that the attributes contained in the Digital Credential have been revoked;
      - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``SUSPEND``, it means that the attributes contained in the Digital Credential have been temporarily suspended;
      - if the Signal ``SignalType`` is ``CREATE``, it means that the requested attributes of a specific Digital Credential are now available; 

      in both cases the Credential Issuer MUST use the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint of the Authentic Source to retrieve the updated information. 
    
    If the ``objectId`` does not correspond to any pseudonym of a User with an on-going process with the Credential Issuer, the Signal MUST be ignored. When the Signal has been processed, the Credential Issuer will either move to the next Signal or, if there are no more Signals to process, update its ``signalId`` counter and resume the Pull cycle.

.. note::

>   When the Credential Issuer requests the credential attributes by invoking the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint of the Authentic Source, it already possesses all information to generate the pseudonym of the Digital Credential' subject. Therefore, to be able to use the Signal Hub, it SHOULD immediately calculate and store the subject's pseudonym, using the same pseudonymization algorithm and salt given by the Authentic Source pseudonymization endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  When the Credential Issuer requests the Credential attributes by invoking the :ref:`authentic-source-endpoint:Get Attribute Claims` PDND endpoint of the Authentic Source, it already possesses all information to generate the pseudonym of the Digital Credential' subject. Therefore, to be able to use the Signal Hub, it SHOULD immediately calculate and store the subject's pseudonym, using the same pseudonymization algorithm and salt given by the Authentic Source pseudonymization endpoint.
```
